# 1 CHAPTER 1. Introduction <a id="section-1"></a>

## 1.1 Background <a id="section-1-1"></a>

The acoustic analysis of submerged three-dimensional structures is of great interest to engineers. Such an elasto-acoustic analysis can be applied to a variety of engineering problems; for example, the determination of the sound fields generated by aircraft or underwater vehicles and the design of transducers and acoustic shielding. The potential theory behind the acoustic problem is also directly applicable to elasto-statics, electromagnetism, hydrodynamics, inviscid flow, and so on. In general, the analysis involves solving the dynamic structural response simultaneously with the acoustic response, where the two are coupled by a fluid structure interaction.

Standard texts in acoustics (e.g., [Junger and Feit [1986]](#bib-junger-feit-1986), [Pierce [1989]](#bib-pierce-1989)) present well-established analytical solutions for simple structures. [Morse and Feshbach [1953]](#bib-morse-feshbach-1953) list eleven coordinate systems which allow analytical treatment and [Kellog [1929]](#bib-kellog-1929) presents the classical theory behind such analysis. Early work in acoustics concentrated on such analytical results. As an example, [Wiener [1951]](#bib-wiener-1951) published results for thin plate problems and [Spence and Granger [1951]](#bib-spence-granger-1951) presented analytical results for rigid spheroids.

However, analytical results are restricted to a narrow range of geometries. For the vast majority of realistic problems, a closed-form analytical solution does not exist. Before the advent of digital computers, experimental testing and asymptotic approximations were the only analysis tools available for arbitrary structures. The availability of high-speed computers meant that complex acoustic problems could be solved efficiently and accurately using numerical methods.

The finite element method (FEM) is recognized as an extremely powerful analytical tool that can be used to solve most well-defined continuum problems. It is strongly associated with structural analysis, but its application to other areas is widespread. Consequently, it was only natural that it should be applied to the full elasto-acoustic problem, and indeed much work has been done in that area. A modern application of the FEM in acoustics is given by [Pinsky and Abboud [1990]](#bib-pinsky-abboud-1990), who consider the transient analysis of the exterior acoustics problem.

A FEM analysis of the acoustic problem is hampered by a number of difficulties. The acoustic problems of greatest interest are often those involving a fluid of infinite extent. Discretization of such a fluid domain for the FEM is obviously difficult and almost always unsatisfactory. Even with the use of infinite elements, the resulting equation set is large and cumbersome. Such a method is inefficient since the variables of most interest are those on the interface between the fluid and structural domains.

Boundary integral formulations of potential problems have been recognized for a long time. By using the power of the new digital computers, it was quickly recognized that a boundary element method (BEM) promised an elegant and efficient solution technique for the numerical analysis of potential problems. Regarding the acoustic analysis of rigid structures, [Chen and Scheikert [1963]](#bib-chen-scheikert-1963) published a numerical method based on the boundary layer integral formulation, and a year later [Chertock [1964]](#bib-chertock-1964) published a method based on the Helmholtz' integral equation. Over the last two decades, the BEM has emerged as the preferred solution technique for acoustic problems in the exterior domain.

The strength of an integral formulation of the acoustic problem is the reduction of dimensionality; the three-dimensional exterior pressure field is represented by a two-dimensional integral relationship on the surface of the structure. The elegance of the method is the mathematical simplicity of the resulting integral expressions. However, it was recognized by [Lamb [1945]](#bib-lamb-1945) that there is a difficulty with the classical integral formulations. At the standing wave frequencies of the interior domain defined by the structural surface, the integral equations for the exterior problem fail to provide a unique solution. The numerical consequences of this non-uniqueness for rigid acoustic problems were examined by [Copley [1967]](#bib-copley-1967) and the first improved numerical formulation to circumvent the problem was presented by [Schenck [1968]](#bib-schenck-1968). [Burton and Miller [1971]](#bib-burton-miller-1971) presented a composite integral formulation that was valid at all wavenumbers. [Kleinman and Roach [1974]](#bib-kleinman-roach-1974) as well as [Filippi [1977]](#bib-filippi-1977) presented a mathematically rigorous analysis of the uniqueness properties of the various formulations, showing the equivalence between the boundary layer and Helmholtz' integral formulations. The behavior of BEM's at critical wave numbers continues to be of interest and recently [Dokumaci [1990]](#bib-dokumaci-1990) discussed the exact nature of numerical failure of the BEM at these frequencies.

The Burton and Miller formulation and Schenck’s Combined Helmholtz Integral Equation Formulation (CHIEF) still remain today as the main numerical strategies for overcoming problems of uniqueness, each having its own strengths and weaknesses. The Burton and Miller formulation is robust and well-tested but necessitates the evaluation of a hypersingular integral. The CHIEF formulation, on the other hand, is simpler but fails at higher frequencies and involves the solution of an overdetermined system of equations.

The first boundary element analyses were concerned with either a prescribed surface velocity distribution or rigid body scattering. [Zienkiewicz, Kelly, and Bettess [1977]](#bib-zienkiewicz-kelly-bettess-1977) presented an analysis of the general coupling between a FEM and BEM, derived from the FEM point of view. It was [Wilton [1978]](#bib-wilton-1978) who first showed the feasibility of coupling a structural finite element formulation and an acoustic boundary element formulation.

Boundary integral and finite element formulations can often be applied to the same set of problems and are often perceived as competing solution techniques. However, the two methodologies have complementary strengths and weaknesses, and their combination often results in a very powerful solution technique. In the elasto-acoustic problem, the FEM is best suited to the accurate determination of the localized structural problem, and the BEM is best suited to the fluid problem of infinite extent. Not only do fluid-structure interaction problems suit this category of analysis, but so do a large number of other engineering problems; e.g., structure-soil interaction, structural non-linearities within homogeneous structures, and so on.

A large proportion of published boundary integral formulations use constant interpolation of the fluid variables. A popular interpolation technique uses the concept of a superparametric element as used by [Wilton [1978]](#bib-wilton-1978) and recently in the field of electromagnetism by [Ingber and Ott [1991]](#bib-ingber-ott-1991). Within the superparametric element, the level of geometric interpolation is higher than the level of fluid interpolation. [Mathews [1979]][(1986)](#bib-mathews-1979-1986) introduced isoparametric interpolation, common in the FEM, where both the fluid and geometric variables are interpolated by quadratic Lagrange shape functions. [Amini and Wilton [1986]](#bib-amini-wilton-1986) implement a number of different interpolation schemes to show the advantages in convergence, efficiency, and accuracy possible with quadratic interpolation of the fluid variables.

[Mariem and Hamdi [1987]](#bib-mariem-hamdi-1987) presented a new variational formulation of the BEM for the thin shell problem. In this formulation, based on the work of [Maue [1949]](#bib-maue-1949) and [Stallybrass [1967]](#bib-stallybrass-1967), the kernel of the hypersingular integral operator is transformed using tangential derivatives and then integrated with respect to the field point over the surface of the structure. The resulting symmetric expression contains only a weak singularity which is amenable to numerical integration. The disadvantage of the method is the increase in computational time needed for the second numerical integration.

Despite the advantages, there seem to be very few researchers using isoparametric elements. The variational method is ideally suited to high order fluid interpolation since the reduction of the singularity is independent of numerical discretization. Of the few published papers using such interpolation techniques, [Coyette and Fyfe [1989]](#bib-coyette-fyfe-1989) and [Jeans and Mathews [1990]](#bib-jeans-mathews-1990) used a variational approach. Isoparametric implementations of the Collocation Burton and Miller method have been published by [Chien, Rajiyah, and Atluri [1990]](#bib-chien-rajiyah-atluri-1990) and [Wu, Seybert, and Wan [1991]](#bib-wu-seybert-wan-1991). The work by [Chien et al.] employed a complicated treatment of the hypersingular integral operator, dependent on the exact form of interpolation, while [Wu et al.] employed the tangential formulation given by Maue and then used additional regularization to integrate the remaining Cauchy type singularity. [Seybert and his co-workers](#bib-seybert-et-al-1985) have published a number of isoparametric implementations of the CHIEF methodology; e.g., [Seybert, Soenarko, Rizzo, and Shippy [1985]](#bib-seybert-et-al-1985). Such an implementation is aided by the absence of a hypersingular integral operator but suffers from the inherent problems of the CHIEF methodologies.

It has already been mentioned that a large amount of research effort has been involved in the question of the uniqueness of the integral formulation at critical frequencies. This work is primarily on the BEM in isolation from the coupled elasto-acoustic formulation. The CHIEF and Burton and Miller techniques seem to have been included in the coupled formulations without qualification, although the fact that the structural formulation does not remove the ill conditioning of the numerical formulation at the critical frequencies is not, in general, immediately obvious. [Huang [1984]](#bib-huang-1984) attempted to clarify the situation by explicitly showing the theoretical non-uniqueness at the critical frequencies of the unrelated internal acoustic problem. However, he also stated that in reality, this non-uniqueness will not be present. Although this was true for the constant fluid basis functions he was using, [Mathews [1986]](#bib-mathews-1986) disproved Huang’s conjecture for isoparametric implementations of the elasto-acoustic BEM.

Like the Burton and Miller formulation, the acoustic problem of thin plates and shells has been hampered by the need to numerically approximate the hypersingular integral operator. A large amount of successful numerical work in this area has been published by Pierce and colleagues; e.g., [Pierce [1987]](#bib-pierce-1987), [Wu, Pierce, and Ginsberg [1987]](#bib-wu-pierce-ginsberg-1987), and [Ginsberg, Chen, and Pierce [1990]](#bib-ginsberg-chen-pierce-1990). This work used the Helmholtz’ integral equation and variational procedures, but also used axisymmetric basis functions based on an a priori understanding of the problem. [Terai [1980]](#bib-terai-1980) applied his BEM to thin plate problems as did [Coyette and Fyfe [1989]](#bib-coyette-fyfe-1989), however the approach of [Coyette and Fyfe] ultimately led to the assumption of incompressible fluid to facilitate an eigenmode analysis. Recently, [Kirkup [1991]](#bib-kirkup-1991) has modeled the effects of acoustic shields using a coupled FEM/BEM, but in general, there seems to be little published work into the application of BEM's to unbaffled thin plate problems of arbitrary geometry and even less using isoparametric interpolation.

Without any simplifying approximations using a BEM to model the effect of the fluid on a submerged structure leads to a non-linear eigenvalue problem. The simplest approach to a dynamic analysis of such a structure involves an analysis at a large number of frequency points. The computational bottlenecks for this approach are the evaluation of the fluid impedance matrix relationship at each frequency, and the large number of degrees of freedom in the structural equation set. [Wilton [1978]](#bib-wilton-1978) recognized the second of these problems and reduced the dynamic structural matrix using the 'dry' eigenmodes. The problem of calculating the fluid impedance matrix at a large number of frequency points is alleviated by frequency interpolation. [Kirkup and Henwood [1989]](#bib-kirkup-henwood-1989), [Schenck and Benthien [1989]](#bib-schenck-benthien-1989), and [Benthien [1989]](#bib-benthien-1989) all presented and evaluated interpolation techniques and [Schenck and Benthien [1989]](#bib-schenck-benthien-1989) discussed in general the problems of applying coupled BEM/FEM techniques to large scale elasto-acoustic problems. The use of such interpolation schemes can also facilitate a modal analysis of the fluid structure interaction problem ([Kirkup and Amini [1990]](#bib-kirkup-amini-1990)). Recently, Lanczos and Ritz vector techniques have been applied to the internal fluid structure interaction problem ([Moini, Nour-Omid, and Carlsson [1990]](#bib-moini-nour-omid-carlsson-1990), [Coyette [1990]](#bib-coyette-1990)), and their use in the coupled BEM/FEM formulations promises significant advantages over modal reduction ([Jeans and Mathews [1991]](#bib-jeans-mathews-1991)).

Overcoming the problem of the hypersingular integral operator present in both Burton and Miller and thin shell acoustic formulations represents a large amount of research effort. Over the years, many solutions to the problem have been suggested along with an unavoidable increase in the computational complexity of the implementation. [Cunefare and Koopmann [1989]](#bib-cunefare-koopmann-1989) presented a methodology they called CHI (Combined Helmholtz' Integrals), where the problem is circumvented by constraining all the field points to be interior to the surface. [Koopmann, Song, and Fahline [1989]](#bib-koopmann-song-fahline-1989) proposed a wave superposition method where the surface pressure distribution was reconstructed from a source distribution interior to the surface of the radiator. Recently, there has been some favorable interest in this method, with [Miller, Moyer, Huang, and Uberall [1991]](#bib-miller-moyer-huang-uberall-1991) looking at the coupling of the FEM and Superposition method, and [Song, Koopmann, and Fahnline [1991]](#bib-song-koopmann-fahnline-1991) investigating the associated numerical errors.

All researchers to date recognize the problems with the retraction of the source surface in order to circumvent high order singularities; i.e., the inherent numerical difficulties of discretizing Fredholm integral equations of the first kind ([Miller [1974]](#bib-miller-1974)). The interior source or field points need to be chosen carefully in order to obtain sufficiently well-conditioned numerical systems.

Many researchers, including the author, believe that the superposition method is simply an ill-conditioned form of the BEM, and singularities in the integral equations are an unavoidable consequence of optimizing the numerical robustness and conditioning of the problem. This is the motivation behind a recently submitted paper ([Jeans and Mathews [1991]](#bib-jeans-mathews-1991)).

## 1.2 Motivation of Present Thesis <a id="section-1-2"></a>

The original motivation for this thesis was to develop and refine the current state of the art computational approaches used for the prediction of radiated sound. After three years of research, the following areas have been documented in this thesis:

(a) Development of a computationally efficient implementation of the Helmholtz' integral equations for three-dimensional structures of arbitrary geometry, including thin plate problems.
   
   i) Comparison and development of variational and collocation formulations.
   
   ii) The use of quadratic isoparametric elements.
   
   iii) Frequency interpolation of fluid matrices.

(b) Coupling of a consistent FEM formulation of the thin shell and plate structural problem to the boundary element formulations.
   
   i) Comparison of modal and Lanczos reduction of the structural formulations to improve solution efficiency.

A general review of the acoustic problem, along with the development of the various integral formulations, is given in Chapter 2. In Chapter 3, a collocation approach is presented for the numerical solution of the Burton and Miller formulation of the exterior acoustic problem. This work describes a novel approach to the hypersingular integral operator, based on the expression of the integral operator given by Maue [1949]. This approach is very similar to the work of Wu, Seybert, and Wan [1991], but without their additional regularization procedures. The resulting numerical implementation is applied to spherical, spheroidal, and cylindrical rigid radiation and scattering problems.

In Chapter 4, the variational method of Mariem and Hamdi [1987] for approximation of the hypersingular integral operator is described and numerically implemented using quadratic isoparametric boundary elements. The resulting thin shell acoustic formulation is applied to different closed and open thin shell problems and compared to the collocation formulation of the thin shell acoustic problem.

With renewed interest in superposition formulation of the acoustic problem, Chapter 5 is devoted to an examination of these methods. It was felt that these methods were not suitable for the general acoustic analysis of arbitrary structures, due to the inherent instabilities of the resulting integral expressions. Unfortunately, to support this viewpoint, a quantitative analysis of the method involved a substantial and disproportionate amount of research effort. However, the examination of the superposition method in this chapter necessitated introducing topics of matrix conditioning and accuracy of the general matrix routines that might not have been included otherwise.

The FEM is introduced in Chapter 6, and the theory behind the thin shell structural problem used in this study is outlined. The coupling procedure between the structural and acoustic problems is described, along with the various methodologies for solving the combined problem. In this chapter, eigenmode reduction of the structural problem and frequency interpolation of the fluid matrices are described. The resulting implementations are tested with the spherical shell problem for which there is an easily accessible analytical result, and results for a submerged cantilever plate are also presented. Significant work is also presented, detailing the behavior of the general elasto-acoustic problem at critical frequencies.

Chapter 7 introduces the theory of Lanczos vectors and describes their usefulness in coupled elasto-acoustic formulations. The resulting implementations are again applied to the spherical test case and compared to corresponding eigenvector reduction techniques. A fluid added mass formulation is described using the variational formulation of the thin shell acoustic problem, and the resulting symmetric structural equation is reduced using Lanczos vectors.

The final chapter is a summary of the thesis. Conclusions are made about the consequences and effectiveness of the presented results and finally proposals for future work are presented.

In Appendix I, the application of acoustic and geometric symmetry, applied to the acoustic boundary element problem is reviewed. Such use of symmetry is of considerable interest not only for the reduction of problem size but for the treatment of half space problems. Summarized in Appendix II are the analytical techniques applied to the spherical elasto-acoustic problem.

