Introduction.

CHAPTER 1.

Introduction

1.1 Background

The acoustic analysis of submerged three dimensional structures is of great interest to en-
gineers. Such an elasto-acoustic analysis can be applied to a variety of engineering problems;
for example the determination of the sound fields generated by aircraft or underwater vehicles
and the design of transducers and acoustic shielding. The potential theory behind the acoustic
problem is also directly applicable to elasto-statics, electromagnetism, hydrodynamics, inviscid
flow and so on. In general the analysis involves solving the dynamic structural response simul-

taneously with the acoustic response, where the two are coupled by a fluid structure interaction.

Standard texts in acoustics (e.g. Junger and Feit [1986], Pierce [1989]) present well estab-
lished analytical solutions for simple structures. Morse and Feshbach [1953] list eleven coordinate
systems which allow analytical treatment and Kellog [1929] presents the classical theory behind
such analysis. Early work in acoustics concentrated on such analytical results. As an example
Wiener [1951] published results for thin plate problems and Spence and Granger [1951] presented

analytical results for rigid spheroids.

However analytical results are restricted to a narrow range of geometries. For the vast
majority of realistic problems, a closed form analytical solution does not exist. Before the advent
of digital computers, experimental testing and asymptotic approximations were the only analysis
tools available for arbitrary structures. The availability of high speed computers meant that

complex acoustic problems could be solved efficiently and accurately using numerical methods.

The finite element method (FEM) is recognized as a extremely powerful analytical tool
that can be used to solve most well defined continuum problems. It is strongly associated with
structural analysis, but its application to other areas is wide spread. Consequently it was only
natural that it should be applied to the full elasto-acoustic problem and indeed much work has
been done in that area. A modern application of the FEM in acoustics is given by Pinsky and

Abboud [1990], who consider the transient analysis of the exterior acoustics problem.

A FEM analysis of the acoustic problem is hampered by a number of difficulties. The acous-

tic problems of greatest interest are often those involving a fluid of infinite extent. Discretization

page 18


Introduction.

of such a fluid domain for the FEM is obviously difficult and almost always unsatisfactory. Even
with the use of infinite elements, the resulting equation set is large and cumbersome. Such a
method is inefficient since the variables of most interest are those on the interface between the

fluid and structural domains.

Boundary integral formulations of potential problems have been recognized for a long time.
By using the power of the new digital computers it was quickly recognized that a boundary
element method (BEM) promised an elegant and efficient solution technique for the numerical
analysis of potential problems. Regarding the acoustic analysis of rigid structures, Chen and
Scheikert [1963] published a numerical method based on the boundary layer integral formulation
and a year later Chertock [1964] published a method based on the Helmholtz’ integral equation.
Over the last two decades, the BEM has emerged as the preferred solution technique for acoustic

problems in the exterior domain.

The strength of an integral formulation of the acoustic problem is the reduction of di-
mensionality; the three dimensional exterior pressure field is represented by a two dimensional
integral relationship on the surface of the structure. The elegance-of the method is the math-
ematical simplicity of the resulting integral expressions. However, it was recognized by Lamb
{1945] that there is a difficulty with the classical integral formulations. At the standing wave
frequencies of the interior domain defined by the structural surface, the integral equations for
the exterior problem fail to provide a unique solution. The numerical consequences of this non-
uniqueness for rigid acoustic problems was examined by Copley [1967] and the first improved
numerical formulation to circumvent the problem was presented by Schenck [1968]. Burton and
Miller [1971] presented a composite integral formulation that was valid at all wavenumbers.
Kleinman and Roach [1974] as well as Filippi [1977] presented a mathematically rigorous analy-
sis of the uniqueness properties of the various formulations, showing the equivalence between the
boundary layer and Helmholtz’ integral formulations. The behaviour of BEM’s at critical wave
numbers continues to be of interest and recently Dokumaci [1990] discussed the exact nature of

numerical failure of the BEM at these frequencies.

The Burton and Miller formulation and Schenck’s Combined Helmholtz Integral Equation
Formulation (CHIEF) still remain today as the main numerical strategies for overcoming prob-
lems of uniqueness, each having it’s own strengths and weaknesses. The Burton and Miller
formulation is robust and well tested but necessitates the evaluation of a hypersingular integral.
The CHIEF formulation on the other hand is simpler but fails at higher frequencies and involves

the solution of an over determined system of equations.

page 19


Introduction.

The first boundary element analyses were concerned with either a prescribed surface velocity
distribution or rigid body scattering. Zienkiewicz, Kelly and Bettess [1977] presented an analysis
of the general coupling between a FEM and BEM, derived from the FEM point of view. It was
Wilton [1978] who first showed the feasibility of coupling a structural finite element formulation

and an acoustic boundary element formulation.

Boundary integral and finite element formulations can often be applied to the same set of
problems, and are often perceived as competing solution techniques. However the two method-
ologies have complementary strengths and weaknesses and their combination often results in
a very powerful solution technique. In the elasto-acoustic problem the FEM is best suited to
the accurate determination of the localized structural problem, and the BEM is best suited to
the fluid problem of infinite extent. Not only do fluid-structure interaction problems suit this
category of analysis, but so do a large number of other engineering problems; e.g. structure-soil

interaction, structural non-linearities within homogeneous structures and so on.

A large proportion of published boundary integral formulations use constant interpolation
of the fluid variables. A popular interpolation technique uses the concept of a superparametric
element as used by Wilton [1978] and recently in the field of electro-magnetism by Ingber and
Ott [1991]. Within the superparametric element the level of geometric interpolation is higher
than the level of fluid interpolation. Mathews [1979][1986] introduced isoparametric interpola-
tion, common in the FEM, where both the fluid and geometric variables are interpolated by
quadratic Lagrange shape functions. Amini and Wilton [1986] implement a number of different
interpolation schemes to show the advantages in convergence, efficiency and accuracy possible

with quadratic interpolation of the fluid variables.

Mariem and Hamdi [1987] presented a new variational formulation of the BEM for the thin
shell problem. In this formulation based on the work of Maue [1949] and Stallybrass [1967],
the kernel of the hypersingular integral operator is transformed using tangential derivatives
and then integrated with respect to the field point over the surface of the structure. The
resulting symmetric expression contains only a weak singularity which is amenable to numerical
integration. The disadvantages of the method is the increase in computational time needed for

the second numerical integration.

Despite the advantages there seem to be very few researchers using isoparametric elements.

The variational method is idealy suited to high order fluid interpolation, since the reduction

page 20


Introduction.

of the singularity is independent of numerical discretization. Of the few published papers us-
ing such interpolation techniques, Coyette and Fyfe [1989] and Jeans and Mathews [1990] used
a variational approach. Isoparametric implementations of the Collocation Burton and Miller
method have been published by Chien, Rajiyah and Atluri [1990] and Wu, Seybert and Wan
[1991]. The work by Chien et al, employed a complicated treatment of the hypersingular inte-
gral operator, dependent on the exact form of interpolation, Wu et al employed the tangential
formulation given by Maue and then used additional regularization to integrate the remaining
Cauchy type singularity. Seybert and his co-workers have published a number isoparametric
implementations of the CHIEF methodology; e.g. Seybert, Soenarko, Rizzo and Shippy [1985].
Such an implementation is aided by the absence of a hypersingular integral operator, but suffers

from the inherent problems of the CHIEF methodologies.

It has already been mentioned that a large amount of research effort has been involved in
the question of the uniqueness of the integral formulation at critical frequencies. This work is
primarily on the BEM in isolation from the coupled elasto-acoustic formulation. The CHIEF and
Burton and Miller techniques seem to have been included in the coupled formulations without
qualification, although the fact that the structural formulation does not remove the ill condi-
tioning of the numerical formulation at the critical frequencies is not, in general, immediately
obvious. Huang [1984] attempted to clarify the situation by explicitly showing the theoretical
non-uniqueness at the critical frequencies of the unrelated internal acoustic problem. However
he also stated that in reality this non-uniqueness will not be present. Although this was true for
the constant fluid basis functions he was using, Mathews (1986] disproved Huang’s conjecture

for isoparametric implementations of the elasto-acoustic BEM.

Like the Burton and Miller formulation, the acoustic problem of thin plates and shells has
been hampered by the need to numerically approximate the hypersingular integral operator.
A large amount of successful numerical work in this area has been published by Pierce and
colleagues; e.g. Pierce [1987], Wu, Pierce and Ginsberg [1987] and Ginsberg, Chen and Pierce
[1990]. This work used the Helmholtz’ intergal equation and variational procedures, but also
used axisymmetric basis functions based on an a priori understanding of the problem. Terai
[1980] applied his BEM to thin plate problems as did Coyette and Fyfe [1989], however the
approach of Coyette and Fyfe ultimately lead to the assumption of incompressible fluid to
facilitate an eigenmode analysis. Recently Kirkup [1991] has modeled the effects of acoustic

shields using a coupled FEM/BEM, but in general there seems to be little published work into

page 21


Introduction.

the application of BEM’s to unbaffled thin plate problems of arbitrary geometry and even less

using isoparametric interpolation.

Without any simplifying approximations using a BEM to model the effect of the fluid on
a submerged structure leads to a non-linear eigenvalue problem. The simplest approach to a
dynamic analysis of such a structure, involves an analysis at a large number of frequency points.
The computational bottle-necks for this approach are the evaluation of the fluid impedance ma-
trix relationship at each frequency, and the large number of degrees of freedom in the structural
equation set. Wilton [1978] recognized the second of these problems and reduced the dynamic
structural matrix using the ‘dry’ eigenmodes. The problem of calculating the fluid impedance
matrix at a large number of frequency points is alleviated by frequency interpolation. Kirkup
and Henwood [1989], Schenck and Benthien [1989] and Benthien [1989] all presented and evalu-
ated interpolation techniques and Schenck and Benthien [1989] discussed in general the problems
of applying coupled BEM/FEM techniques to large scale elasto-acoustic problems. The use of
such interpolation schemes can also facilitate a modal analysis of the fluid structure interaction
problem (Kirkup and Amini [1990]). Recently Lanczos and Ritz vector techniques have been
applied to the internal fluid structure interaction problem (Moini, Nour-Omid and Carlsson
[1990], Coyette [1990]), and their use in the coupled BEM/FEM formulations promises signifi-

cant advantages over modal reduction (Jeans and Mathews [1991]).

Overcoming the problem of the hypersingular integral operator present in both Burton
and Miller and thin shell acoustic formulations, represents a large amount of research effort.
Over the years many solutions to the problem have been suggested along with an unavoidable
increase in the computational complexity of the implementation. Cunefare and Koopmann [1989]
presented a methodology they called CHI (Combined Helmoltz’ Integrals), where the problem
is circumvented by constraining all the field points to be interior to the surface. Koopmann,
Song and Fabline [1989] proposed a wave superposition method, where the surface pressure
distribution was reconstructed from a source distribution interior to the surface of the radiator.
Recently there has been some favorable interest in this method, with Miller, Moyer, Huang
and Uberall [1991] looking at the coupling of the FEM and Superposition method, and Song,

Koopmann and Fahniline [1991] investigating the associated numerical errors.

All researchers to date recognize the problems with the retraction of the source surface in
order to circumvent high order singularities; i.e. the inherent numerical difficulties of discretizing
Fredholm integral equations of the first kind (Miller [1974]). The interior source or field points

need to be chosen carefully in order to obtain sufficiently well conditioned numerical systems.

page 22


Introduction.

Many researchers, including the author, believe that the superposition method is simply an
ill-conditioned form of the BEM, and singularities in the integral equations are an unavoidable
consequence of optimizing the numerical robustness and conditioning of the problem. This is

the motivation behind a recently submitted paper (Jeans and Mathews [1991]).

1.2 Motivation of Present Thesis

The original motivation for this thesis was to develop and refine the current state of the
art computational approaches used for the prediction of radiated sound. After three years of

research the following areas have been documented in this thesis:

(a) Development of a computationally efficient implementation of the Helmholtz’ in-
tegral equations for three dimensional structures of arbitrary geometry, including
thin plate problems.

i) Comparison and development of variational and collocation formulations.
ii) The use of quadratic isoparametric elements.
iii) Frequency interpolation of fluid matrices.

(b) Coupling of a consistent FEM formulation of the thin shell and plate structural
problem to the boundary element formulations.

i) Comparison of modal and Lanczos reduction of the structural formula-

tions to improve solution efficiency.

A general review of the acoustic problem, along with the development of the various integral
formulations, is given in Chapter 2. In Chapter 3 a collocation approach is presented for the
numerical solution of the Burton and Miller formulation of the exterior acoustic problem. This
work describes a novel approach to the hypersingular integral operator, based on the expression
of the integral operator given by Maue [1949]. This approach is very similar to the work of Wu,
Seybert and Wan [1991], but without their additional regularization procedures. The resulting
numerical implementation is applied to spherical, spheroidal and cylindrical rigid radiation and

scattering problems.

In Chapter 4 the variational method of Mariem and Hamdi [1987] for approximation of
the hypersingular integral operator is described and numerically implemented using quadratic

isoparametric boundary elements. The resulting thin shell acoustic formulation is applied to

page 23
